Copyright reserved Please turn over










MATHEMATICS



EXAMINATION GUIDELINES



GRADE 12

2021





These guidelines consist of 16 pages.



Mathematics 2 DBE/2021
Examination Guidelines
Copyright reserved Please turn over


CONTENTS Page

Chapter 1: Introduction 3

Chapter 2: Assessment in Grade 12
2.1 Format of question papers for Grade 12 4
2.2 Weighting of topics per paper for Grade 12 4
2.3 Weighting of cognitive levels 5

Chapter 3: Elaboration of Content for Grade 12 (CAPS) 6

Chapter 4: Acceptable reasons: Euclidean Geometry
4.1 Acceptable Reasons: Euclidean Geometry (ENGLISH) 9
4.2 Aanvaarbare redes: Euklidiese Meetkunde (AFRIKAANS) 12

Chapter 5: Information sheet 15

Chapter 6: Guidelines for marking 16

Chapter 7: Conclusion 16
.

Mathematics 3 DBE/2020
Examination Guidelines
Copyright reserved Please turn over


1. INTRODUCTION

The Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement (CAPS) for Mathematics outlines the nature and purpose of
the subject Mathematics. This guides the philosophy underlying the teaching and assessment of the subject in
Grade 12.

The purpose of these Examination Guidelines is to:

 Provide clarity on the depth and sc ope of the content to be assessed in the Grade 12 National Senior
Certificate Examination in Mathematics
 Assist teachers to adequately prepare learners for the examinations

This document deals with the final Grade 12 external examinations. It does not de al in any depth with the
school-based assessment (SBA), p erformance assessment tasks (PATs) or final external practical
examinations as these are clarified in a separate PAT document which is updated annually.

These guidelines should be read in conjunction with:

 The National Curriculum Statement (NCS) Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement (CAPS) :
Mathematics
 The National Protocol of Assessment: An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior
Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding the
National Protocol for Assessment (Grades R–12)
 National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National Curriculum
Statement, Grades R to 12

Included in this document is a list of Euclidean Geometry reasons, both in English and Afrikaans,
which should be used as a guideline when teaching learners Euclidean Geometry.

The Information Sheet for Paper 1 and 2 is included in this document.


Mathematics 4 DBE/2021
Examination Guidelines
Copyright reserved Please turn over


2. ASSESSMENT IN GRADE 12

All candidates will write two external papers as prescribed.

2.1 Format of Question Papers for Grade 12

Paper Topics Duration Total Date Marking
1
Patterns and sequences
Finance, growth and decay
Functions and graphs
Algebra, equations and inequalities
Differential Calculus
Probability
3 hours 150 October/November Externally
2
Euclidean Geometry
Analytical Geometry
Statistics and regression
Trigonometry
3 hours 150 October/November Externally

Questions in both Papers 1 and 2 will assess performance at different cognitive levels with an
emphasis on process skills, critical thinking, scientific reasoning and strategies to investigate and
solve problems in a variety of contexts.

An Information Sheet is included on p. 15.


2.2 Weighting of Topics per Paper for Grade 12

PAPER 1 MARKS PAPER 2 MARKS
Algebra, Equations and Inequalities
Number Patterns
Functions and Graphs
Finance, Growth and Decay
Differential Calculus
Counting Principle and Probability
25
25
35
15
35
15
Statistics and Regression
Analytical Geometry
Trigonometry
Euclidean Geometry

20
40
50
40
TOTAL 150 TOTAL 150



Mathematics 5 DBE/2021
Examination Guidelines
Copyright reserved Please turn over

2.3 Weighting of Cognitive Levels

Papers 1 and 2 will include questions across four cognitive levels. The distribution of cognitive
levels in the papers is given below.

Cognitive Level Description of Skills to be Demonstrated Weighting
Approximate
Number of
Marks in a
150-mark
Paper
Knowledge
 Recall
 Identification of correct formula on the
information sheet (no changing of the subject)
 Use of mathematical facts
 Appropriate use of mathematical vocabulary
 Algorithms
 Estimation and appropriate rounding of
numbers
20% 30 marks
Routine
Procedures
 Proofs of prescribed theorems and derivation
of formulae
 Perform well-known procedures
 Simple applications and calculations which
might involve few steps
 Derivation from given information may be
involved
 Identification and use (after changing the
subject) of correct formula
 Generally similar to those encountered in class
35% 52–53 marks
Complex
Procedures
 Problems involve complex calculations and/or
higher-order reasoning
 There is often not an obvious route to the
solution
 Problems need not be based on a real-world
context
 Could involve making significant connections
between different representations
 Require conceptual understanding
 Learners are expected to solve problems by
integrating different topics.
30% 45 marks
Problem
Solving
 Non-routine problems (which are not
necessarily difficult)
 Problems are mainly unfamiliar
 Higher-order reasoning and processes are
involved
 Might require the ability to break the problem
down into its constituent parts
 Interpreting and extrapolating from solutions
obtained by solving problems based in
unfamiliar contexts.
15% 22–23 marks


Mathematics 6 DBE/2021
Examination Guidelines
Copyright reserved Please turn over


3. ELABORATION OF CONTENT/TOPICS

The purpose of the cl arification of the topics is to give guidance to the teacher in terms of depth of
content necessary for examination purposes. Integration of topics is encouraged as learners should
understand Mathematics as a holistic discipline. Thus q uestions integrating various topics can be
asked.

FUNCTIONS

1. Candidates must be able to use and interpret functional notation. In the teaching process learners
must be able to understand how
)(xf has been transformed to generate
)( xf  ,
)(xf ,
)( axf 

axf )( ,
)(xaf and
)(yfx where
Ra .
2. Trigonometric functions will ONLY be examined in PAPER 2.

NUMBER PATTERNS, SEQUENCES AND SERIES

1. The sequence of first differences of a quadratic number pattern is linear. Therefore, knowledge
of linear patterns can be tested in the context of quadratic number patterns.
2. Recursive patterns will not be examined explicitly.
3. Links must be clearly established between patterns done in earlier grades.

FINANCE, GROWTH AND DECAY

1. Understand the difference between nominal and effective interest rates and convert fluently
between them for the following compounding periods: monthly, quarterly and half-yearly or
semi-annually.
2. With the exception of calculating i in the Fv and Pv formulae, candidates are expected to calculate
the value of any of the other variables.
3. Pyramid schemes will NOT be examined in the examination.

ALGEBRA

1. Solving quadratic equations by completing the square will NOT be examined.
2. Solving quadratic equations using the substitution method (k-method) is examinable.
3. Equations involving surds that lead to a quadratic equation are examinable.
4. Solution of non-quadratic inequalities should be seen in the context of functions.
5. Nature of the roots will be tested intuitively with the solution of quadratic equations and in all the
prescribed functions.



Mathematics 7 DBE/2021
Examination Guidelines
Copyright reserved Please turn over


DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS

1. The following notations for differentiation can be used:
)(xf ,
xD ,
dx
dy or
y .
2. In respect of cubic functions, candidates are expected to be able to:
 Determine the equation of a cubic function from a given graph.
 Discuss the nature of stationary points incl uding local maximum, local minimum and points
of inflection.
 Apply knowledge of transformations on a given function to obtain its image.
3. Candidates are expected to be able to draw and interpret the graph of the derivative of a function.
4. Surface area and volume will be examined in the context of optimisation.
5. Candidates must know the formulae for the surface area and volume of the right prisms. These
formulae will NOT be provided on the formula sheet
6. If the optimisation question is based on the surface ar ea and/or volume of the cone, sphere and/or
pyramid, a list of the relevant formulae will be provided in that question. Candidates will be
expected to select the correct formula from this list.

PROBABILITY

1. Dependent events are examinable but conditional probabilities are not part of the syllabus.
2. Dependent events in which an object is not replaced are examinable.
3. Questions that require the learner to count the different number of ways that objects may be
arranged in a circle and/or the use of combinations are not in the spirit of the curriculum.
4. In respect of word arrangements, letters that are repeated in the word can be treated as the same
(indistinguishable) or different (distinguishable). The question will be specific in this regard.

EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY AND MEASUREMENT

1. Measurement can be tested in the context of optimisation in calculus and two - and
three-dimensional trigonometry.
2. Composite shapes could be formed by combining a maximum of TWO of the stated shapes.
3. The following proofs of theorems are examinable:
 The line drawn from the centre of a circle perpendicular to a chord bisects the chord;
 The line drawn from the centre of a circle that bisects a chord is perpendicular to the chord;
 The angle subtended by an arc at the centre of a circle is double the size of the angle
subtended by the same arc at the circle (on the same side of the chord as the centre);
 The opposite angles of a cyclic quadrilateral are supplementary;
 The angle between the tangent to a circle and the ch ord drawn from the point of contact is
equal to the angle in the alternate segment;
 A line drawn parallel to one side of a triangle divides the other two sides proportionally;
 Equiangular triangles are similar.


Mathematics 8 DBE/2021
Examination Guidelines
Copyright reserved Please turn over


4. Corollaries derived from the theorems and axioms are necessary in solving riders:
 Angles in a semi-circle
 Equal chords subtend equal angles at the circumference
 Equal chords subtend equal angles at the centre
 In equal circles, equal chords subtend equal angles at the circumference
 In equal circles, equal chords subtend equal angles at the centre.
 The exterior angle of a cyclic quadrilateral is equal to the interior opposite angle of the
quadrilateral.
 If the exterior angle of a quadrilateral is equal to the interior opposite angle of the
quadrilateral, then the quadrilateral is cyclic.
 Tangents drawn from a common point outside the circle are equal in length.
5. The theory of quadrilaterals will be integrated into questions in the examination.
6. Concurrency theory is excluded.

TRIGONOMETRY

1. The reciprocal ratios cosec , sec  and cot  can be used by candidates in the answering of
problems but will not be explicitly tested.
2. The focus of trigonometric graphs is on the relationships, simplification and determining points
of intersection by solving equations, although characteristics of the graphs should not be
excluded.

ANALYTICAL GEOMETRY

1. Prove the properties of polygons by using analytical methods.
2. The concept of collinearity must be understood.
3. Candidates are expected to be able to integrate Euclidean Geometry axioms and theorems into
Analytical Geometry problems.
4. The length of a tangent from a point outside the circle should be calculated.
5. Concepts involved with concurrency will not be examined.

STATISTICS

1. Candidates should be encouraged to use the calculator to calculate standard deviation, variance
and the equation of the least squares regression line.
2. The interpretation of standard deviation in terms of normal distribution is not examinable.
3. Candidates are expected to identify outliers intuitively in both the scatter plot as well as the box
and whisker diagram.
In the case of the box and whisker diagram, observations that lie outside the interval
(lower quartile – 1,5 IQR; upper quartile + 1,5 IQR) are considered to be outliers. However,
candidates will not be penalised if they did not make use of this formula in identifying outliers.



Mathematics 9 DBE/2021
Examination Guidelines
Copyright reserved Please turn over


4. ACCEPTABLE REASONS: EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY

In order to have some kind of uniformity, the use of the following shortened versions of the theorem
statements is encouraged.

4.1 ACCEPTABLE REASONS: EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY (ENGLISH)

THEOREM STATEMENT ACCEPTABLE REASON(S)
LINES
The adjacent angles on a straight line are supplementary. s on a str line
If the adjacent angles are supplementary, the outer arms of these angles
form a straight line.
adj s supp
The adjacent angles in a revolution add up to 360. s round a pt OR s in a rev
Vertically opposite angles are equal. vert opp s =
If AB || CD, then the alternate angles are equal. alt s; AB || CD
If AB || CD, then the corresponding angles are equal. corresp s; AB || CD
If AB || CD, then the co-interior angles are supplementary. co-int s; AB || CD
If the alternate angles between two lines are equal, then the lines are
parallel.
alt s =
If the corresponding angles between two lines are equal, then the lines
are parallel.
corresp s =
If the co-interior angles between two lines are supplementary, then the
lines are parallel.
coint s supp

TRIANGLES
The interior angles of a triangle are supplementary.  sum in  OR sum of s in ∆
OR Int s 
The exterior angle of a triangle is equal to the sum of the interior
opposite angles.
ext  of 
The angles opposite the equal sides in an isosceles triangle are equal. s opp equal sides

The sides opposite the equal angles in an isosceles triangle are equal. sides opp equal s
In a right -angled triangle, the square of the hypotenuse is equ al to the
sum of the squares of the other two sides.
Pythagoras OR
Theorem of Pythagoras
If the square of the longest side in a triangle is equal to the sum of the
squares of the other two sides then the triangle is right-angled.
Converse Pythagoras
OR
Converse Theorem of Pythagoras
If three sides of one triangle are respectively equal to three sides of
another triangle, the triangles are congruent.
SSS

If two sides and an included angle of one triangle are respectively
equal to two sides and an included angle of another triangle, the
triangles are congruent.
SAS OR SS
If two angles and one side of one triangle are respectively equal to two
angles and the corresponding side in another triangle, the triangles are
congruent.
AAS OR S


If in two right -angled triangles, the hypotenuse and one side of one
triangle are respectively equal to the hypotenuse and one side of the
other, the triangles are congruent
RHS OR 90°HS



Mathematics 10 DBE/2021
Examination Guidelines
Copyright reserved Please turn over

THEOREM STATEMENT ACCEPTABLE REASON(S)
The line segment joining the midpoints of two sides of a triangle is
parallel to the third side and equal to half the length of the third side
Midpt Theorem
The line drawn from the midpoint of one side of a triangle, parallel to
another side, bisects the third side.
line through midpt || to 2nd side
A line drawn parallel to one side of a triangle divides the other two
sides proportionally.
line || one side of 
OR
prop theorem; name || lines
If a line divides two sides of a triangle in the same proportion, then the
line is parallel to the third side.
line divides two sides of ∆ in prop
If two triangles are equiangular, then the corresponding sides are in
proportion (and consequently the triangles are similar).
||| s OR equiangular ∆s
If the corresponding sides of two triangles are proportional, then the
triangles are equiangular (and consequently the triangles are similar).
Sides of ∆ in prop
If triangles (or parallelograms) are on the same base (or on bases of
equal length) and between the same parallel lines, then the triangles (or
parallelograms) have equal areas.
same base; same height OR
equal bases; equal height

CIRCLES
The tangent to a circle is perpendicular to the radius/diameter of the
circle at the point of contact.
tan  radius
tan  diameter
If a line is drawn perpendicular to a radius/diameter at the point where
the radius/diameter meets the circle, then the line is a tangent to the
circle.
line  radius OR
converse tan  radius OR
converse tan  diameter
The line drawn from the centre of a circle to the midpoint of a chord is
perpendicular to the chord.
line from centre to midpt of chord
The line drawn from the centre of a circle perpendicular to a chord
bisects the chord.
line from centre  to chord
The perpendicular bisector of a chord passes through the centre of the
circle;
perp bisector of chord
The angle subtended by an arc at the centre of a circle is double the
size of the angle subtended by the same arc at the circle (on the same
side of the chord as the centre)
 at centre = 2 × at circumference
The angle subtended by the diameter at the circumference of the circle
is 90.
s in semi-circle OR
diameter subtends right angle OR
 in
2
1 
If the angle subtended by a chord at the circumference of the circle is
90, then the chord is a diameter.
chord subtends 90 OR
converse s in semi-circle
Angles subtended by a chord of the circle, on the same side of the
chord, are equal
s in the same seg
If a line segment joining two points subtends equal angles at two points
on the same side of the line segment, then the four points are concyclic.
line subtends equal s OR
converse s in the same seg
Equal chords subtend equal angles at the circumference of the circle. equal chords; equal s
Equal chords subtend equal angles at the centre of the circle. equal chords; equal s
Equal chords in equal circles subtend equal angles at the circumference
of the circles.
equal circles; equal chords; equal s


Mathematics 11 DBE/2021
Examination Guidelines
Copyright reserved Please turn over

THEOREM STATEMENT ACCEPTABLE REASON(S)
Equal chords in equal circles subtend equal angles at the centre of the
circles.
equal circles; equal chords; equal s
The opposite angles of a cyclic quadrilateral are supplementary opp s of cyclic quad
If the opposite angles of a quadrilateral are supplementary then the
quadrilateral is cyclic.
opp s quad supp OR
converse opp s of cyclic quad
The exterior angle of a cyclic quadrilateral is equal to the interior
opposite angle.
ext  of cyclic quad
If the exterior angle of a quadrilateral is equal to the interior opposite
angle of the quadrilateral, then the quadrilateral is cyclic.
ext  = int opp  OR
converse ext  of cyclic quad
Two tangents drawn to a circle from the same point outside the circle
are equal in length
Tans from common pt OR
Tans from same pt
The angle between the tangent to a circle and the chord drawn from the
point of contact is equal to the angle in the alternate segment.
tan chord theorem

If a line is drawn through the end-point of a chord, making with the
chord an angle equal to an angle in the alternate segment, then the line
is a tangent to the circle.
converse tan chord theorem OR
 between line and chord
QUADRILATERALS
The interior angles of a quadrilateral add up to 360. sum of s in quad
The opposite sides of a parallelogram are parallel. opp sides of ||m
If the opposite sides of a quadrilateral are parallel, then the
quadrilateral is a parallelogram.
opp sides of quad are ||
The opposite sides of a parallelogram are equal in length. opp sides of ||m
If the opposite sides of a quadrilateral are equal , then the quadrilateral
is a parallelogram.
opp sides of quad are =
OR
converse opp sides of a parm
The opposite angles of a parallelogram are equal. opp s of ||m
If the opposite angles of a quadrilateral are equal then the quadrilateral
is a parallelogram.
opp s of quad are = OR
converse opp angles of a parm
The diagonals of a parallelogram bisect each other. diag of ||m
If the diagonals of a quadrilateral bisect each other, then the
quadrilateral is a parallelogram.
diags of quad bisect each other
OR
converse diags of a parm
If one pair of opposite sides of a quadrilateral are equal and parallel,
then the quadrilateral is a parallelogram.
pair of opp sides = and ||
The diagonals of a parallelogram bisect its area. diag bisect area of ||m
The diagonals of a rhombus bisect at right angles. diags of rhombus
The diagonals of a rhombus bisect the interior angles. diags of rhombus
All four sides of a rhombus are equal in length. sides of rhombus
All four sides of a square are equal in length. sides of square
The diagonals of a rectangle are equal in length. diags of rect
The diagonals of a kite intersect at right-angles. diags of kite
A diagonal of a kite bisects the other diagonal. diag of kite
A diagonal of a kite bisects the opposite angles diag of kite


Mathematics 12 DBE/2021
Examination Guidelines
Copyright reserved Please turn over

4.2 ACCEPTABLE REASONS: EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY (AFRIKAANS)

STELLING AANVAARBARE REDE
LYNE
Aangrensende hoeke op 'n reguitlyn is supplementêr. e op reguit lyn
As aangrensende hoeke supplementêr is, lê die buitenste bene van die
hoeke in 'n reguitlyn.
aangr. e suppl.
Die som van die aangrensende hoeke om 'n punt is 360 . e om 'n punt OF e in 'n omw
Regoorstaande hoeke is gelyk. regoorst. e
As AB || CD, dan is die verwissellende hoeke gelyk verw. e ; AB || CD
As AB || CD, dan is die ooreenkomstige hoeke gelyk. ooreenk. e ; AB || CD
As AB || CD, dan is die ko-binnehoeke supplementêr. ko-binne e ; AB || CD
As die verwissellende hoeke tussen twee lyne gelyk is, dan is die lyne
ewewydig.
verw. e =
As die ooreenkomstige hoeke tussen twee lyne gelyk is, dan is die lyne
ewewydig.
ooreenk. e =
As die ko-binnehoeke tussen twee lyne supplementêr is, dan is die lyne
ewewydig.
ko-binne e suppl.

DRIEHOEKE
Die binnehoeke van 'n driehoek is supplementêr.  som van  OF som van e in 
OF binne e
Die buitehoek van 'n driehoek is gelyk aan die som van die twee
teenoorstaande binnehoeke.
buite  van
Die hoeke teenoor die gelyke sye van 'n gelykbenige driehoek, is
gelyk.
e teenoor gelyke sye

Die sye teenoor die gelyke sye van 'n gelykbenige driehoek, is gelyk. sye teenoor gelyke e
In 'n reghoekige driehoek is die vierkant op die skuinssy gelyk aan die
som van die vierkante op die ander twee sye.
Pythagoras OF Stelling van
Pythagoras
As die vierkant op een sy van 'n driehoek gelyk is aan die som van die
vierkante op die ander twee sye, dan is die driehoek reghoekig.
Omgekeerde Pythagoras
OF
Omgekeerde stelling: Pythagoras
As drie sye van een driehoek onderskeidelik gelyk is aan drie sye van
'n ander driehoek, dan is die driehoeke kongruent.
SSS
As twee sye en 'n ingeslote hoek van een driehoek onderskeidelik
gelyk is aan twee sye en 'n ingeslote hoek van 'n ander driehoek, dan is
die twee driehoeke kongruent.
SHS OF SS
As twee hoeke en 'n sy van een driehoek onderskeidelik gelyk is aan
twee hoeke en 'n ooreenstemmende sy van 'n ander driehoek, dan is die
twee driehoeke kongruent.
HHS OF S
As die skuinssy en 'n reghoeks y van 'n reghoekige driehoek
onderskeidelik gelyk is aan die skuinssy en 'n reghoeksy van 'n ander
reghoekige driehoek, dan is die twee driehoeke kongruent.
RHS OF 90°HS
Die lynstuk wat die middelpunte van twee sye van 'n driehoek verbind,
is ewewydig aan en gelyk aan die helfte van die derde sy.
Midpt.-stelling
Die lynstuk wat van die middelpunt van een sy van 'n driehoek
ewewydig aan die tweede sy getrek word, halveer die derde sy.
lyn deur midpt || 2de sy
Die lyn ewewydig aan een sy van 'n driehoek verdeel die ander twee
sye in eweredige dele.
lyn || een sy van OF
eweredige stelling; noem || lyne

Mathematics 13 DBE/2021
Examination Guidelines
Copyright reserved Please turn over
STELLING AANVAARBARE REDE
As 'n lyn twee sye van 'n driehoek in eweredige dele verdeel, is die lyn
ewewydig aan die derde sy.
lyn verdeel twee sye van
eweredig
As twee driehoe ke gelykhoekig is, is hulle ooreenstemmende sye
eweredig (en is driehoeke dus gelykvormig).
||| e OF gelykhoekige e
As die ooreenstemmende sye van twee driehoeke eweredig is, is die
driehoeke gelykhoekig (en is driehoeke dus gelykvormig).
Sye van e eweredig

Driehoeke (of parallelogramme) op dieselfde basis en tussen dieselfde
ewewydige lyne is gelyk in oppervlakte.
dieselfde basis ; dieselfde hoogte
OF
gelyke basis ; gelyke hoogte
SIRKELS
'n Raaklyn aan 'n sirkel is loodreg op die radius/ middellyn van die
sirkel by die raakpunt.
raaklyn  radius
raaklyn  middellyn
As 'n lyn loodreg getrek word na die radius/middellyn by die punt
waar die radius/middellyn die sirkel ontmoet, dan is die lyn 'n raaklyn
aan die sirkel.
Lyn  Radius OF
omgekeerde raaklyn  radius OF
omgekeerde raaklyn  middellyn
Die lynstuk wat die middelpunt van 'n sirkel met die middelpunt van 'n
koord verbind, is loodreg op die koord.
lyn vanuit midpt na midpt van
koord
Die loodlyn uit die middelpunt van 'n sirkel na 'n koord, halveer die
koord.
lyn vanuit midpt  op koord
Die middelloodlyn van 'n koord gaan deur die middelpunt van die
sirkel.
middelloodlyn van koord
Die hoek wat 'n koord by die middelpunt van 'n sirkel onderspan, is
dubbel die hoek wat dit by eni ge punt op die omtrek onderspan (aan
dieselfde kant van die koord as die midpt).
Midpts = 2 x Omtreks
Die omtrekshoek wat deur die middellyn onderspan word, is 90°.  in halwe sirkel OF
middellyn onderspan regte hoek
OF  in


As 'n koord van 'n sirkel 'n regte hoek by die omtrek onderspan, dan is
die koord 'n middellyn.
Koord onderspan 90 OF
omgekeerde  in halwe sirkel
Hoeke onderspan deur 'n koord van 'n sirkel, aan dieselfde kant van die
koord, is gelyk.
e in dieselfde segment
As 'n lynstuk wat twee punte verbind, gelyke hoeke by twee ander
punte aan dieselfde kant van die lynstuk onderspan, dan is die vier
punte konsiklies (d.w.s. hulle lê op die omtrek van 'n sirkel).
Lynstuk onderspan gelyke e OF
omgekeerde e in dieselfde
segment
Gelyke koorde onderspan gelyke omtrekshoeke. gelyke koorde; gelyke e
Gelyke koorde onderspan gelyke middelpuntshoeke. gelyke koorde; gelyke e
Gelyke koorde in gelyke sirkels onderspan gelyke omtrekshoeke. gelyke sirkels; gelyke koorde ;
gelyke e
Gelyke koorde in gelyke sirkels onderspan gelyke middelpuntshoeke. gelyke sirkels; gelyke koorde ;
gelyke e
Die teenoorstaande hoeke van 'n koordvierhoek is supplementêr. teenoorst. e van kvh
As die teenoorstaande hoeke van 'n vierhoek supplementêr is, dan is
die vierhoek 'n koordevierhoek.
teenoorst. e van vierhoek is supp
OF omgekeerde teenoorst e
koordevierhoek
Die buitehoek van 'n koordevierhoek is gelyk aan die teenoorstaande
binnehoek.
buite van kvh

Mathematics 14 DBE/2021
Examination Guidelines
Copyright reserved Please turn over

STELLING AANVAARBARE REDE
As die buitehoek van 'n vierhoek gelyk is aan die teenoorstaande
binnehoek, dan is die vierhoek 'n koordevierhoek.
buite van vierhoek = teenoorst.
binne  OF omgekeerde buite 
koordevierhoek
Twee raaklyn wat vanaf dieselfde punt buite 'n sirkel na 'n sirkel
getrek word, is ewe lank.
Raaklyne vanuit gemeensk. Punt
OF raaklyne vanaf dieselfde
punt
Die hoek wat gevorm word tussen 'n raaklyn aan 'n sirkel en 'n koord
wat vanuit die raakpunt getrek word, is gelyk aan die hoek in die
oorstaande segment.
raaklyn koord stelling
As 'n lyn deur die eindpunt van 'n koord 'n hoek met die koord vorm
wat gelyk is aan die hoek in die oorstaande segment, dan is die lyn 'n
raaklyn aan die sirkel.

 tussen lyn en koord OF
omgekeerde raaklyn koord stelling
VIERHOEKE
Die som van die binnehoeke van 'n vierhoek is 360. som van e in vierhoek
Die teenoorstaande sye van 'n parallelogram is ewewydig. teenoorst. sye van ||m
As die teenoorstaande sye van 'n vierhoek ewewydig is, dan is die
vierhoek 'n parallelogram.
teenoorst sye van vierh is ||
Die teenoorstaande sye van 'n parallelogram is gelyk in lengte. teenoorst. sye van ||m
As die teenoorstaande sye van 'n vierhoek gelyk is, dan is die vie rhoek
'n parallelogram.
teenoorst sye van vierh = OF
omgekeerde teenoorst sye van
||m
Die teenoorstaande hoeke van 'n parallelogram is gelyk. teenoorst. e van ||m
As die teenoorstaande hoeke van 'n vierhoek gelyk is, dan is die
vierhoek 'n parallelogram.
teenoorst. e van vierh = OF
omgekeerde teenoorst. e van ||m
Die hoeklyne van 'n parallelogram halveer mekaar. hoeklyne van ||m
As die hoeklyne van 'n vierhoek mekaar halveer, dan is die vierhoek 'n
parallelogram.
hoeklyne van vierh halveer mekaar
OF omgekeerde hoeklyne van ||m
As een paar teenoorstaande sye van 'n vierhoek gelyk en ewewydig is,
dan is die vierhoek 'n parallelogram.

teenoorst. sye = en ||
Die hoeklyne van 'n parallelogram halveer die oppervlakte van die
parallelogram.
hoeklyn van ||m halveer opp
Die hoeklyne van 'n ruit halveer mekaar reghoekig. hoeklyne van ruit
Die hoeklyne van 'n ruit halveer die teenoorstaande binnehoeke. hoeklyne van ruit
Al vier sye van 'n ruit is gelyk. sye van ruit
Al vier sye van 'n vierkant is gelyk. sye van vierkant
Die hoeklyne van 'n reghoek is ewe lank. hoeklyne van reghoek
Die hoeklyne van 'n vlieër sny mekaar reghoekig. hoeklyne van vlieër
Die een hoeklyn van 'n vlieër halveer die ander hoeklyn. hoeklyne van vlieër
Een hoeklyn van 'n vlieër halveer die teenoorstaande binnehoeke hoeklyne van vlieër


Mathematics 15 DBE/2021
Examination Guidelines
Copyright reserved Please turn over

5. INFORMATION SHEET

a
acbbx 2
42 

)1( niPA 

)1( niPA 
niPA )1( 
niPA )1( 
dnaTn )1( 

 dnan
n )1(22S 
1 n
n arT

 
1
1

 r
raS
n
n ;
1r
r
aS 
1 ;
11  r
  
i
ixF
n
11 

  
i
ixP
n 11
h
xfhxfxf
h
)()(lim)('
0



22 )()( 1212 yyxxd 
M





 
2;2
2121 yyxx
cmxy 

)( 11 xxmyy 
12
12
xx
yym 

tanm
    222
rbyax 

In ABC:
C
c
B
b
A
a
sinsinsin 
Abccba cos.2222 
CabABCarea sin.2
1

   sin.coscos.sinsin 

   sin.coscos.sinsin 

   sin.sincos.coscos 

   sin.sincos.coscos 









1cos2
sin21
sincos
2cos
2
2
22





 cos.sin22sin 
n
x
x 

 
n
xx
n
i
i
2
2
1




 Sn
AnAP )()( 
P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B) – P(A and B)
bxay ˆ

 



 2)(
)(
xx
yyxxb


Mathematics 16 DBE/2021
Examination Guidelines
Copyright reserved


6. GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR MARKING

 If a learner makes more than one attempt at answering a question and does not cancel any of
them out, only the first attempt will be marked irrespective of which of the attempt(s) may be
the correct answer.
 Consistent Accuracy marking regarding calculations will be followed in the following cases:
- Subquestion to subquestion: When a certain variable is incorrectly calculated in one
subquestion and needs to be substitute d into another subquestion , full marks can be
awarded for the subsequent subquestions provided the methods used are correct and the
calculations are correct.
- Assuming values/answers in order to solve a problem is unacceptable.

7. CONCLUSION

This Examination Guidelines document is meant to articulate the assessment aspirations espoused in
the CAPS document. It is therefore not a substitute for the CAPS document which teachers should
teach to.

Qualitative curriculum coverage as enunciated in the CAPS cannot be over-emphasised.